YMCA in South Australia
South Australia (SA)  has a unique position in Australia's history as, unlike the other states which were founded as colonies, South Australia began as a self governing province Many were attracted to this and Adelaide and SA developed as an independent and free thinking state.
The compound of philosophical radicalism, evangelical religion and self reliant ability typical of its founders had given an equalitarian flavour to South Australian thinking from the beginning.
It was into this social setting that in February 1850 a meeting was called primarily for the formation of an Association (apparently meaning a Y.M.C.A.)
for apprentices and others, after their day's work, to enjoy books, lectures, discussions, readings, friendly relief and recreation for a leisure hour.
In September 1850 records show that this became “The Young Men's Christian Association of South Australia" as evidenced by a member's letter in London Y.M.C.A.
Report 1851.
There was no census in 1850 but the 1851 census put the total population of South Australia at 63,700 with males numbering 35,302.
The discovery of Gold in Ballarat caused a large migration from South Australia and by 1852 some 8000 had left for the Goldfields.
As a consequence the various YMCA groups that had become established failed and by 1870 none remained.
"The next available authentic record of an Association in South Australia does not appear until some members of London Y.M.C.A.
coming to Adelaide, joined with ex members of the defunct original Adelaide Branch, and also members of the Brompton Association.
A meeting of promoters was also held at Presbyterian Church.
They became associated in the Exchange Room of the Adelaide Town Hall on November 28th, 1878 at a public meeting for the promotion of a revival of the Y.M.C.A.
in Adelaide.
Sir John Colton (a member of the Adelaide Association in 1853 and a founder of Prince Alfred College) had been asked to preside, but was absent through illness and the chair was occupied by Mr. Richard Searle ( a managing partner of D & W Murray and Co ) who became the first President of the Association.
A committee was formed to draft a constitution, later drawn up and signed by 585 Adelaide young men."
Since that time the YMCA has operated continuously, been part of the fabric of the state and  served the community of South Australia
Leading the YMCA was regarded as a calling and attracted men of compassion and social conscience.
Not known as chief executive officers until the 1990s, they were known as General Secretaries.
With the YMCA of Adelaide one of the very early organisations for social good it attracted some of the state's leading influential figures to its board and men of high calibre as General Secretary.
The history of the organisation in South Australia is very much tied to the leadership by both General Secretaries (CEOs) and the presidents along with the boards who backed them.
1879 - H.H.
Birt.
appointed by the board on a part-time basis.
Birt oversaw activities in the temporary premises, Salisbury Chambers in king William Street and to manage the alteration of the newly leased premises in Gawler Place which opened 27 August 1879.
1880 -1886 Alex A Walker.
Walker was secretary of the Flinders Street Presbyterian Men's Society which merged into the YMCA with him continuing as General Secretary.
In 1886 the annual report of the YMCA indicated a lack of funds and Walker confessed to having appropriated £1288/16/7.
In court and before Chief Justice Sir Samuel Way, Walker revealed the money had gone on assisting impecunious young men.
Walker was regarded as a very hard working Secretary who said he did not have a night off in any month and the board believed he did not have fraudulent intent but compassion rather than criminality.
He was sent to jail for 4 years hard labour.
1886 - 1900 John James Virgo.
The 'new' YMCA building in Gawler Place was opened in 1884 and in 1886 the Glenelg born Virgo was appointed General Secretary following the conviction of the previous General Secretary for embezzling funds.
In 1888 the YMCA began Our Boys Institute for work among boys 13 to 18 years of age.
For young men, activities included Bible classes, sporting teams, lectures, debating and choral societies, a gymnasium, camps and an employment and immigration department.
Virgo was prominent in Adelaide's religious life and conducted evangelistic services on Sunday evenings at the Theatre Royal in Hindley Street.1900 Virgo became secretary of the Australasian Union of Y.M.C.A.s and 1903 was appointed secretary of the Y.M.C.A., Sydney then General Secretary of the London Central Y.M.C.A.
in 1911.
Virgo wrote his memoirs in 1939.
He died in 1956.
1905 - 1916 H.A Wheeler.
Wheeler was a capable administrator who adapted the programmes and emphasis to the times.
Much of the evangelical work was dropped to focus on the work with young men.
In 1908 Wheeler left for two years to work with the YMCA in America.
This forged a link with North American YMCA's and more modern methods of physical development and a rapid development of membership.
An employment department was formed in 1912 fulfilling an important social welfare role especially for young male migrants.
At the outbreak of WW1 Wheeler took the initiative in promoting a nation-wide War Services Y.M.C.A.
organisation and later was placed in charge of all Australian War Services in the European Zone.
WW1 saw the Adelaide YMCA support YMCA staff overseas as evidenced by a letter to Wheeler from Menza camp Egypt by Col S Price Weir OC 10th battalion.
by1916 The army Department was the largest work done by the Adelaide YMCA with operations at Mitcham, Cheltenham, Balaklava, Murray Bridge, Torrens Island, Gawler.
